In this video we'll talk about the steps needed to write output to text files using C++ streams and
the following slides.
Talk about the main classes and methods that we can use to write to files and then I go over a few examples
in life code the two classes I've discussed for textfile output are extreme and O.F. stream.
We must always include string.
Then we declare a stream object of either extreme or O.F. stream type.
We then connect a stream object we just create it to the file we want to write to and our file system
once the file is connected and open we can write to it by default.
C++ will create the file if it does not exist and if it does exist the contents of the file will be
truncated or removed unless we state otherwise we can write the files in binary or text mode and we
can use any of the stream manipulators that we've already learned about then when we're done processing
the file we must close the file.
This is very important for output files since it flushes any buffers that may not have been written
out to the file yet.
It's pretty easy in the next few slides will discuss the details of opening a file for output checking
to make sure the file was opened correctly.
Writing to the file in different ways and then closing the file.
It's important to remember that by default output files will be created if they don't exist but we have
to make sure that if we provide a path along with the file name when we open the file that that path
must exist.
Otherwise we'll get an error when creating the file.
If the file already exists then it will be overwritten or truncated.
Unless we specify that we want to append to the contents of the existing file.
Finally we can write in text mode or in binary mode in this section we're only concentrating on textmode.
So in this example we're creating an object named out file and we're using the stream class as its type.
Notice I'm also initialized in the object as well.
The initializer takes two arguments the first is the name of the file as we've already seen with input
files.
This can be very operating system and Id dependent so in code like we're going to use dot dot slash
So it puts the file in our parent directory.
The second parameter specifies the mode and properties of the file that's being opened in the first
example we're using stood iOS out.
This means to open the file in output mode.
So we're able to write to it but not read from it by default.
Files are opened in text mode in the second example we're opening the file and output mode and in binary
mode this is necessary when we're writing non-text files that contain binary data.
Notice the vertical bar pipe character between stood out and stood I always binary.
This is the bitwise OR operator.
And when we use it in context like this it sets both output and binary modes to true.
At this point the file will be opened if it was found and truncate it or will be created.
In this slide we use the extreme class the extreme class can actually open a file for reading and writing
at the same time.
We won't be doing that.
But if you have a file that you need to read from and write to we can use the stream class to do that
in this line.
Be Using the O.F. stream class is the type of our file o f stream is used commonly for output files
only.
We can create an off stream object the same way we created an extreme object.
However in the case of a O.F. stream object stood iOS out is optional since it's already the default.
So the first two declarations of our file have the same effect.
There's another way to open the file as commonly seen in code we saw it with input files so let's see
those next
when we open a file for output we have a few choices as to how we want to open the file butterfat the
file is opened for truncation and we can explicitly specify that as in the first example if we want
the output file open but we want all further output to append to the end of the file.
Then we can use this stupid iOS app flag when we open the file.
Finally we can use the Stood iOS 8 flag when we want to open a file that exists and we want to set the
initial position of the next right to the end of the existing file.
But we're free to move around using random access.
We're going to use random access files and this course will focus solely on text based sequential files.
Now just as we saw with input files we can first create the stream object and then open it.
So let's see that
in this example notice that we're creating out file as an o f stream object but we haven't provided
any file name to associate with it.
This is common use case since many times we don't know the file and when we have to get it from the
user or from some other resource at runtime once we have the filename we can then use the open method
on the stream object to open the file so we can say out file that open and give it the file name or
out file open file name and any flags we need.
Now we attempted to create the output stream and connected to a file.
We have to be sure this was successful before we start writing to the file and we'll do that next.
The process here is exactly as it was with input file streams.
We have to be sure that the file was opened successfully so we can call the is open method on the file
stream up to it.
We created this returns a boolean indicating whether the file is open for processing.
If we get back.
True we're good to go if we get back fault's some error occurred if no error occur.
Then we can go ahead and write to the file.
Let's see another way that we can test to see if the file was open successfully.
In this case we can simply test a stream object itself if the stream object was not instantiated then
this would return false and we can decide what to do next.
Otherwise it's good to go and we can proceed writing to the file
once we finish writing to the file we have to close it.
This is a simple method call to the close method without put files.
This is very important since it flushes out any buffers that may not have been written out to file yet.
OK so now we know how to open a file check to make sure that it's open and close it.
Now let's write to it.
There are many ways to write to a file and these examples we're going to use text files.
The most common ways to use formatted output using the stream insertion operator.
So in this example we have an integer a double and a string and three variables.
If we want to write them out to our output file we can assume that outfought was created successfully.
All we have to do is use the insertion operator as we've been using all along with C out except that
we insert the values into our file.
That's it.
Very simple very powerful.
Remember the stream manipulators we learned about in the beginning of the section we can use them all
as well to format our output however we want.
Also notice that end line flushes out any unwritten buffers
so let's write a program that copies one txt file to another we'll assume the existing file is my file
that text and we want to copy it to another file named copied text.
First we create an extreme object in file and initialized it to our input file.
Then we create an o f stream object out file and initialize it to our output file.
In this case if the output file does not exist it will be created.
If it does exist it will be truncated.
We need to be sure that both files were opened successfully So we checked using two if statements and
if there's any error we terminate in the next slide will complete the program and actually do the copying.
So at this point our input file and output files are open and ready for processing.
We can use a while loop with a getline to read the input file one line at a time into the stream variable
line.
If the read was successful the while loop condition will be true and we write the line to out file.
Then we close both files.
That's it really really easy to copy one file to another.
OK so let's see one more example this time will use an formatted read and write and then we'll see some
examples in life code.
In this example again we're using infile as an extreme object an out file as an o a stream object.
We go through the same steps necessary to open the files check to be sure they are open and so forth.
And then in the next slide we'll do the actual copying but this time in an formatted manner one character
at a time.
So here in the while loop we read a character from infile using the get method and if it's successful
we write that character to file using the put method.
When we reach the end of file the loop terminates and we close the files.
That's it.
So there you go two different ways to copy text files one that's doing it one line at a time and another
one that's doing it one character at a time using an formatted read and write.
Great.
So now let's head over to the idea and we'll see some examples of creating and writing to text files.